---
layout: post
title: "Fortin, J P, and Kasper Daniel Hansen. Reconstructing A/B Compartments as Revealed by Hi-C Using Long-Range Correlations in Epigenetic Data. bioRxiv, January. Cold Spring Harbor Labs Journals. doi:10.1101/019000."
date: 2015-08-19
categories: ATAC-seq, single-cell, DNA methylation, microarray
---

[Link to paper](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/06/03/019000)

# Abstract

- A/B comparments identified from Hi-C data.
- A/B compartments are cell type-specific and are associated with open and closed chromatin, respectively.
- F&H show A/B compartments can be identified from other epigenetic data - 450k, DNase-seq, scATAC-seq, scWGBS
  - Importantly, these 450k is a cheap assay with plentiful data
- Compartments identified by analysing long range correlations of these data and showing that these differ between open and closed compartments.

# Background

- Hi-C gold standard, but expensive because high sequencing coverage is required and requires a large amount of starting material.
- A/B compartments are defined on the MB scale
  - Interactions between loci in Hi-C are generally intra-compartment.
  - A = "open", B = "closed"
- Since initial publication, focus in Hi-C data has been increasing the resolution and not so much refinement of A/B compartments or their cell type-specificity.
- Hi-C A/B compartments identified by eigenvector analysis of the (normalised) contact matrix. A sign change in the first eigenvector corresponds to a A/B switch.
  - The normalisation method, 'observed-expected' method, divides bands of the contact matrix by the mean. Without this normalisation you can't identify A/B compartments from the first eigenvector.
  - Q: Effect of different normalisation strategies? e.g., divide by median or loess fit to signal/distance?
- Application: Find differences in mutation rates between A and B compartments in prostate adenocarcinoma.

# Results

- Sign of eigenvector is arbitrary; F&H assign B to be positive sign.
  - But wouldn't it also be arbitrarily different across experiments?
- Using two different cell types, F&H find high agreement and correlation between A/B compartments estimated using data from different experiments (labs, sequencing depth, etc.)
- High(er) resolution data does not change the estimated A/B compartments.

## 450k data

- Implicit assumption of no biological variability of compartments (i.e. "no variation in compartments between different individuals in the same cell type")
  - Q: What about cell-to-cell variation?
- 288 EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from HapMap
- Bin the genome and average the methylation level in each bin across samples and CpGs in the bin.
  - Q: Assumes little variation across samples?
  - Only CpGs > 4kb away from CGIs were used (open sea CpGs)
- Counterintuitively, higher levels of methylation associated with A (open) compartments.
  - F&H posit this is due to averaging over open sea probes
  - Get reasonable correlation and compartment agreement to Hi-C data from this analysis. BUT...
- Can do lots better by doing an eigenvector analysis of a suitably processed between-CpG correlation matrix.
  - Correlations are between-sample (of the same cell type) across pairs of probes.
- Method
  - 100kb bins with only open sea CpGs.
  - Compute median of pairwise correlations so that each 100kb bin is summarised by a single number.
  - Compute first eigenvector of binned correlation matrix and smooth using two iterations of an MA with window = 3 bins.
  - Q: What about another summary of methylation levels in the bin?
- Most disagreements occur when magnitude of eigenvector in either the Hi-C or 450k data is closer to zero.
- Performance is worse on small chromosomes.
  - Presumably due to fewer probes with which to estimate the correlation structure.
- Also demonstrate ability of 450k method to recover Hi-C A/B compartments using fibroblasts
  - Harder here, because cell types are slightly different for Hi-C and 450k data.
  - Run a negative control sample and get lower correlation/agreement, although these still exist between cell types.
- When comparing overlap of PMDs and B compartments, what are the CIs of the ORs?
- Surprisingly, no decay with distance of binned correlation matrix.
  - It's because of the normalisation method.
- Cool: Within B compartments, methylation levels of different samples are consistently ranked.
  - Provide evidence that this isn't a technical artefact.
- Don't recommend the use of 27k data for estimating compartments because there are too few open sea probes (~5600).
- Many of the observations made from the 450k data are recapitulated in the DNase-seq data.

## Single cell data

- Propose simple strategy for assigned scATAC-seq data to a cell type (simpler than that used by [Cusanovich et al.]({% post_url 2015-08-17-Cusanovich-2015bm %})).

# Methods

- For methylation data, correlations are computed of the sample $\times$ probe matrix of M-values.

# Comments and questions on figures

- Figure 4: The correlation between (e) and (f) is perhaps a little weaker than you'd like.

# Questions and comments

- F&H showed use [Cusanovich et al.]({% post_url 2015-08-17-Cusanovich-2015bm %})'s scATAC-seq data, but what about [scATAC-seq paper]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %})'s scATAC-seq data
- What about bulk WGBS or bulk ATAC-seq?
- It'd be worth stratifying my co-methylation analyses (at least the correlations of aggregate methylation levels) by A/B compartment status; "we observe that both DNA methylation and DNase signal are highly correlated between distant loci, provided that the two loci are both in the closed compartment"
- The PMDs of Lister are pretty sketchy, I think.
- This paper is an example of why people care about co-methylation.
- Why didn't F&H try bulk WGBS data?
- "It is well known that this eigenvector is equal to the first left singular vector from the singular value decomposition of the data matrix. The right singular vector of this matrix is in turn equal to the first eigenvector of the sample correlation matrix; also called the first principal component. This vector has been shown to carry fundamental information about batch effects [Leek et al., 2010]. Because of this relationship, we are concerned that our method might fail when applied to experiments that are heavily affected by batch effects; we recommend careful quality control of this issue before analysis."
  - I would love a reference on that in order better understand.
- Having a quick look at the scATAC-seq data (GSM1647124 CtlSet1.dhsmatrix.txt.gz), holy hell these data are sparse. The gzip file is 14Mb whereas the plaintext version is 1.7G!
- The arbitrary line choice for distinguishing cell types in the scATAC-seq data; why not use something simple like LDA?
  - Is it because you have no truth?
- The scWGBS data for oocytes has rubbish correlations; why?
  - What do I know about this from my work with the Seisenberger data?
