---
layout: post
title: "Cusanovich, D. A. et al. Multiplex single-cell profiling of chromatin accessibility by combinatorial cellular indexing. Science 348, 910–914 (2015)."
date: 2015-08-17
categories: ATAC-seq, single-cell
---

[Link to paper](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25953818)

This is another method for measuring chromatin accessibility in single cells and also uses the [ATAC-seq]({% post_url 2015-07-28-Buenrostro-2013bc %}) assay as its basis. It was published slightly before the [scATAC-seq paper]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %})[^published].

[^published]: The scATAC-seq paper, however, was apparently submitted earlier.

Cusanovich _et al_. pitch the advantage of their method as avoiding the need to physically separate single cells, which limits those conventional single-cell preparatory methods to linear scaling with the number of cells. Of course, the combinatorial barcoding approach has its own disadvantages, which are duly discussed.

The method is as follows (Figure 1a):

1. Barcode populations of nuclei in each of many wells (1×96 well plate in the paper) using a barcoded transposase.
2. Pool, dilute, and redistribute intact nuclei to a second set of wells (1×96 well plate in the paper). Second round of barcoding and complete library construction (i.e., ATAC-seq library prep).

With high probability, each cell receives a unique combination of barcodes that allows for its identification. Collisions must of course be dealt with[^collisions]. The setup in the paper gives a 96×96=9,216 combinations. The authors report that their experiments have an expected collision rate of 11%, which is higher than my naive expectation of a desirable collision rate.

[^collisions]: The barcode collision rate can be modeled by the [birthday problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_problem) for which there are well-known and simple analytical formulae.

The first experiment in the paper uses equal number of human GM12878 cells (the same sample as used in the [ATAC-seq]({% post_url 2015-07-28-Buenrostro-2013bc %}) and [scATAC-seq]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %}) papers) and mouse (Patski) nuclei. The aim was to distinguish the two cell types from one another based on estimates of chromatin accessibility (i.e. based on properties of the ATAC-seq read distributions). All 9,216 barcodes were associated with at least one mapped read. Most barcodes, however, have very few reads; only 533/1916 barcodes had more than their cutoff of 500 reads (range: 502 to 69,847 reads per barcode combination; median: 2503)). So the data are very sparse, probably even more so than [scATAC-seq]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %}). The authors estimate that they capture 13-55% of the molecular complexity observed in a ATAC-seq experiment run on bulk, 500 cells.

A second set of experiments used mixtures of two different __human__ cell types (GM12878 vs. HEK293T and GM12878 vs. HL-60). They took the union of DHSs (analogous to the union of exons models used in gene expression analyses) and counted reads mapping to each DHS-union in each cell. The data were binarised such that each each peak in each cell was classified as "used" or "unused" (any reads in the peak resulted in it being classified as "used"). The pairwise [Jaccard distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaccard_index) was then used as a metric to measure how similar cells were to one another and these summarised by [multidimensional scaling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multidimensional_scaling). While the first dimension of the MDS summarisation was highly correlated with sequencing depth (Spearman's rho 0.95), the second dimension appears to separate the two cell types. Reassuringly, cells sequenced with more reads correlated with greater discriminatory power.

There is also interest in identifying differential accessibility between cell types. A logistic regression is used to test for differential accessibility (fit with [_VGAM_](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/VGAM/index.html)). Briefly, each cell is assigned to the "best guess" of its cell type based on the genome-wide profile of read counts in cell type-specific DHSs. This "best guess" cell type is then regressed on the counts at each peak to identify cell type-specific ATAC peaks using a likelihood ratio test. Cells were excluded if their identity could not be classified with a specified confidence.

Cusanovich _et al_. identify four major subpopulations of cells within the GM12878 data using [latent semantic indexing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latent_semantic_indexing). Latent semantic indexing seems to be basically singular value decomposition of the read counts matrix (weighted and transformed to reflect frequency of peaks), I think. They provide some evidence that these subpopulations reflect differences in cell cycle and are not due to batch effects. They further posit that other subpopulation-specific differences may be due to environmental signals.

The authors note that their approach could be scaled to work with 384-well plates, which "could feasibly be scaled to collect data from ~17,280 cells per experiment by using 384-by-384 barcoding and sorting 100 nuclei per well (assuming similar cell recovery and collision rates)".

Finally, some top-of-the-head comparisons to the [scATAC-seq paper]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %}) paper:

- Compared to the [scATAC-seq paper]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %}), this is much more of a 'technology' rather than 'biology' paper.
- Cusanovich _et al_. make no attempt to differentiate the "one active copy" from the "two active copies" state.
- Cusanovich _et al_. do not investigate DNA fragment lengths and their relationship to nucleosome state.
- Cusanovich _et al_. profile roughly an order of magnitude more individual cells per sample but perhaps at a lower resolution.
- Cusanovich _et al_. rely more heavily on DHSs as 'peaks'; the [scATAC-seq paper]({% post_url 2015-08-12-Buenrostro-2015jf %}) uses the aggregated scATAC-seq data to call peaks.

## Comments and questions on figures

- Figure 1b: What's causing the faint diagonal, which would correspond to barcodes with ~50% human and ~50% mouse DNA.
- Figure 3b: There is no labelling of points with respect to cell type. I guess it's implicit that points clustering together are from the same cell type, but I'd like to see the data showing this.

## Miscellaneous comments, questions and thoughts

- How much of the data sparsity has to do with sequencing depth; are they sequencing to saturation?
  - "A high PCR duplication rate (~73% of mappable, nonmitochondrial reads) confirmed that the library had been sequenced to saturation". This is very similar to the results in the scATAC-seq paper. I guess this means there's very little material to work with from each cell.
- Much of the analysis relies on previously defined DNase hypersensitivity sites (DHSs); what can we do with this data when don't have this information? What can  we learn uniquely by using [sc]ATAC-seq?
- "Given the sparsity of the data, identifying pairs of coaccessible DNA elements within individual loci is statistically challenging and merits further development."
- Might be worthwhile trying to better understand the distribution of read counts per barcode combination (Supplementary Figure 2).
- Unlike in the
