---
layout: post
title: "Buenrostro, J. D., Giresi, P. G., Zaba, L. C., Chang, H. Y. & Greenleaf, W. J. Transposition of native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin, DNA-binding proteins and nucleosome position. Nat Meth (2013). doi:10.1038/nmeth.2688"
date: 2015-07-28
categories: ATAC-seq
---

[Link to paper](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3959825/)

This paper introduces the ATAC-seq technology, an **a**ssay for **t**ransposase-**a**ccessible **c**hromatin using **seq**uencing. ATAC-seq works by transposing sequencing adaptors into native chromatin _in vitro_ using the hyperactive Tn5 transposase. ATAC-seq can be used to "reveal the interplay between genomic locations of open chromatin, dnA-binding proteins, individual nucleosomes and chromatin compaction at nucleotide resolution". An advantage of ATAC-seq over other chromatin assays (e.g., DNaseq-seq and FAIRE-seq) is that it only requires a small number of cells (500-50,000).

Existing assays for studying chromatin have several shortcomings and ATAC-seq aims to address three main limitations:

1. In order to acquire sufficient starting material (millions of cells), these cells may need to be grown _ex vivo_ and this may perturb the _in vivo_ chromatin states of interest.
2. The signal is an average over many millions of cells, which can "drown out" heterogeneity.
3. The assays are time consuming, which may preclude their use in clinical settings.

The hyperactive Tn5 transposase (a prokaryotic transposase) simultaneously fragments and tags a genome with sequencing adaptors. The theory is that the transposase can only access open chromatin. In the words of the authors,

> In ATAC-seq, Tn5 transposase integrates its adaptor payload into regions of accessible chromatin, whereas steric hindrance in less accessible chromatin makes such transposition less probable. Therefore, amplifiable DNA fragments suitable for high-throughput sequencing are preferentially generated at locations of open chromatin.

The authors claim that ATAC-seq can achieve a signal-to-noise ratio comparable to DNaseq-seq with 3-5 orders of magnitude fewer cells. Based on Figure 1c, it appears that FAIRE-seq is considerably noisier than both ATAC-seq and DNaseq-seq. MNaseq-seq, another chromatin assay, assays __all__ nucleosomes whereas ATAC-seq is concentrated at "regulatory" nucleosomes; I don't quite understand this claim about ATAC-seq.

Based on the distribution of fragment sizes (Figure 2), the authors conclude that ATAC-seq can reveal differentially accessible forms of chromatin (e.g., CTCF-bound regions, transcription start sites, transcribed and promoter-flanked regions, and condensed heterochromatin).

The authors are keen to emphasise the clinical utility of ATAC-seq, noting that it can be performed from DNA obtained via "standard serial blood draws" and that "the total required time from blood draw to sequencing was approximately 275 min" (this doesn't include the time it takes to perform the sequencing).

It appears to be possible to perform allele-specific analyses from ATAC-seq data (Supplementary Figure 12). This will be generally be difficult given the relatively low sequencing coverage of ATAC-seq data, which will often be less than that required to reliably call heterozygous SNVs.

Read start sites need to be adjusted to account for how the Tn5 tranposase incorporates into the genome (+4 bp on the forward strand, -5 bp on the reverse strand). Peaks were called using ZINBA, which uses a zero-inflated negative binomial model of read counts.

Supplementary Figure 4, in conjunction with a reference to previous work, suggests that there is no substantial nucleotide bias in the incorporation site of the Tn5 transposase.

Supplementary Figure 6 shows that FACS-sorted cells gives a much better signal-to-noise ratio than an equal number of cells obtained via dilution. However, the main signal is probably still detectable in cells obtained via dilution.

The cutoffs used in fitting nucleosome peaks based on fragment lengths were derived from a mixture model that has an exponential distribution for nucleosome-free DNA and Gaussian distributions centred at the expected insert sizes.

## Miscellaneous comments, questions, and thoughts

- The genome browser tracks aren't always normalised across tracks, which can make interpretation trickier (e.g., Figure 3a, 4a 5b). For what type of analyses might normalisation be important?
- "Data were collected using either 34×8×34 reads from a MiSeq or 50×8×50 reads on a HiSeq."
  - What does the "8" refer to in each case?
- __Transposase__: Transposase is an enzyme that binds to the end of a transposon and catalyzes the movement of the transposon to another part of the genome by a cut and paste mechanism or a replicative transposition mechanism.
