---
layout: post
title: "Buenrostro, J. D. et al. Single-cell chromatin accessibility reveals principles of regulatory variation. Nature (2015). doi:10.1038/nature14590"
date: 2015-07-29
categories: ATAC-seq, single-cell
---

[Link to paper](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26083756)

An 'obvious' extension to their [earlier work]({% post_url 2015-07-28-Buenrostro-2013bc %}), this paper introduces single-cell ATAC-seq (scATAC-seq). This implementation uses a programmable microfluidic device (Fluidigm) to assay hundreds of single cells. The authors explore the cell-to-cell variability of chromatin accessibility and identify _trans_-factors and _cis_-elements involved in this process. The biggest biological claim is that:

> The pattern of accessibility variation in _cis_ across the genome recapitulates chromosome compartments _de novo_, linking single-cell accessibility variation to three-dimensional genome organization.

The method works as follows (Figure 1a and text):

1. IFC cell capture.
1. Transposition and PCR on the integrated fluidics circuit (IFC).
2. Libraries collected and PCR amplified with cell-identifying barcodes.
3. Pool the barcoded libraries and sequence.
4. ...
5. Profit?

To demonstrate scATAC-seq the authors profile 254 individual GM12878 (a HapMap sample) lymphoblastoid cells. They also used this cell line (albeit in bulk) in their [earlier work]({% post_url 2015-07-28-Buenrostro-2013bc %}). Before looking for single-cell variability, they demonstrate that aggregated scATAC-seq data does a good job of recapitulating observations made using bulk ATAC-seq and DNase-seq (using 10,000-10,000,000 cell), even extending to the fragment length distributions (which can be used to infer the distribution of nucleosomes). They also profile a host of other cell lines, many from the ENCODE project with extensive genomic profiling data.

Some chambers of the IFC fail and data from these must be filtered. Perhaps it's possible to salvage this data using appropriate normalisation?

In a diploid cell we expect 0, 1, or 2 copies of each regulatory element. __TODO: Assess Extended Data Fig. 3a__.  Consequently, the data from scATAC-seq are sparse, certainly much more so than scRNA-seq. Other single-cell techniques will also produce sparse data, e.g., single-cell methylation data. Interestingly, the data shown in Figure 1b show that many more cells have a count of 1 than 2; does this mean widespread allele-specfic variability or and undersampling due to low sequencing coverage? Figure 1d shows that you still get sequencing reads from an empty chamber!

The authors state that the sparse nature of the data "makes analysis of cellular variation at individual regulatory elements impractical"; I am somewhat more optimistic.

The main analysis attempts to quantify how different each single-cell's data looks from the aggregated data across a set of genomic features. There is some attempt to correct for technical and sampling error in single-cell data.
